[KIC] ingress to gateway migration (#6239)
Kong/docs.konghq.com: app/_src/kubernetes-ingress-controller/reference/ingress-to-gateway-migration.md

---
title: Migrating Ingress to Gateway
type: reference
purpose: |
  Which ingress annotations are migrated to Gateway API features?
---

As the name states, the {{site.kic_product_name}} was born as an ingress controller.
Starting from the early stage of the Gateway API development, the {{site.kic_product_name}}
began supporting the Gateway API as well, as an alternative to the ingress resources.
Since the Gateway API graduation, happened in late 2023, the {{site.kic_product_name}}
promoted the Gateway API as the preferred way of configuring the {{site.base_gateway}}
in Kubernetes.

## The IngressToGateway tool

Kong contributed to the kubernetes-sigs project [`ingress2gateway`](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/ingress2gateway)
by creating a Kong provider able to convert ingress resources into Gateway ones.

> The `Ingress2Gateway` tool provides a unique `print` command that gets ingress resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `ingress2Gateway` tool provides a unique `print` command that gets ingress resources
```

and displays the Gateway API equivalent. The output of such an operation can be either
directly applied to the cluster, or into a file, to have a new set of yaml files
containing the converted configuration.

## Supported Ingress features and annotations

The following is a list of all the ingress features, along with the Gateway API
equivalent support.

> Kong ingresses provides an extensive set of [annotations](../references/annotations.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Kong ingress provides an extensive set of [annotations](../references/annotations.md).
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{{ site.kic_product_name }} provides an extensive set of [annotations](../references/annotations.md).
```

> Below is the list of the features supported by the Ingress2Gateway's Kong provider.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This is the list of the features supported by the Ingress2Gateway's Kong provider.
```

> Such a list will be improved over time.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Such a list is improved over time.
```

| Annotation name | Conversion |
|-----------------|-------------------------|
| REQUIRED [`kubernetes.io/ingress.class`](#kubernetesioingressclass) | `gateway.spec.gatewayClassName` |
| [`konghq.com/methods`](#konghqcommethods) | `httpRoute.spec.rules[*].matches[*].method` |
| [`konghq.com/headers.*`](#konghqcomheaders) | `httpRoute.spec.rules[*].matches[*].headers` |
| [`konghq.com/plugins`](#konghqcomplugins) | `httpRoute.spec.rules[*].matches[*].headers` |

## Features

> ### kubernetes.io/ingress.class

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### `kubernetes.io/ingress.class`
```

Don't we want code syntax highlighting since this is a known const? (and similarly do the rest like so?)

Author: I didn't do that for consistency, as we have a [page](https://docs.konghq.com/kubernetes-ingress-controller/latest/references/annotations/) with tons of such annotations unformatted. If we want to do code highlight, I think we should do it consistently (and probably in a dedicated PR).

> [Annotation description](/kubernetes-ingress-controller/latest/reference/annotations/#kubernetesioingressclass)

> If configured on an Ingress resource, this value will be used as the `gatewayClassName`
> set on the corresponding generated Gateway.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If configured on an Ingress resource, this value is used as the `gatewayClassName`
set on the corresponding generated Gateway.
```

### konghq.com/methods

> [Annotation description](/kubernetes-ingress-controller/latest/reference/annotations/#konghqcommethods)

If configured on an Ingress resource, this value is used to set the `HTTPRoute` method
matching configuration. Since many methods can be set as a comma-separated list,

> each method is used to create a match copy. All the matches belonging to the same

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
each method creates a match copy. All the matches belonging to the same
```

`HTTPRoute` rule are put in OR.

### konghq.com/headers.*

> [Annotation description](/kubernetes-ingress-controller/latest/reference/annotations/#konghqcomheaders)

> If configured on an Ingress resource, this value is used to set the `HTTPRoute` header

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If configured on an Ingress resource, this value sets the `HTTPRoute` header
```

> matching configuration. Only exact matching is supported. Since many values can be

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
matching configuration. Only exact matching is supported. Because many values can be
```

> matching configuration. Only exact matching supported. Since many values can be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
matching configuration. Only exact matching is supported. Since many values can be
```

set for the same header name as a comma-separated list, each header value is used
to create a match copy. All the matches belonging to the same `HTTPRoute` rule
are put in OR.

### konghq.com/plugins

> [Annotation description](/kubernetes-ingress-controller/latest/reference/annotations/#konghqcomplugins)

> If configured on an Ingress resource, this value is used to attach plugins

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If configured on an Ingress resource, this value attaches plugins
```

> to routes. The plugins references are converted into `HTTPRoute` `ExtensionRef` filters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to routes. Plugins references are converted into `HTTPRoute` `ExtensionRef` filters.
```
